# Chapter 15 Object-Oriented Programming

Object-oriented programming is based on three fundamental concepts: data abstraction, inheritance, and dynamic binding.

Inheritance and dynamic binding

 1. make it easier to define new classes that are similar but not identical
 2. make it easier for us to write programs that can ignore the details of how those similar types differ

## 15.1 OOP: an Overvie

### Inheritance

 - Classes related by inheritance form a hierarchy
 - Base class: at the root of the hierachy, from which other classes inherit, directly or indirectly
 - Derived class: inheriting class
 - Virtual: The base class defines virtual functions as those it expects its derived classes to define for themselves
 - A derived class must specify the class(es) from which it intends to inheri. It does so in a **class dervation list**

Example:

    Class Quote {
    public:
	    std::string isbn() const;
	    virtual double net_price(std::size_t n) const;
    };
	
	class Bulk_quote : public Quote {
	public:
		double net_price(std::size_t) const override;
	};

### Dynamic Binding

The intention of Dynamic Binding is that we can use the same code to process objects of either type *Quote* or *Bulk_quote* interchageably.

It is often known as **run-time binding** as well.

## 15.2 Defining Base and Derived Classes

### Defining a base class

    class Quote {
    public:
	    Quote() = default;
	    Quote(const std::string &book, double sales_price): bookNo(book), price(sales_price) { }
	    std::string isbn() const { return bookNo;}
	    virtual double net_price(std::size_t n) const {return n*price;}
	    virtual ~Quote() = default 
	    //dynamic binding for the destructor
    private:
	    std::string bookNo;
    protected:
	    double price = 0.0;
    };
    
### Member Functions and Inheritance

 - dervied class override
 - base class virtual
 - Any nonstatic member function, other than a constructor, maybe virtual
 - virtual keyword should only appear on the declaration inside the class and may not be used on a function definition that appears outside the class body.

### Access Control and Inheritance
"Protected" makes sure that data members can be accessible from derived classes
while "private" can't

### Defining a derived class

A derived class must specify from which class it inherits. It does so in its class derivation list.

Each base class name may be preced by an optional access specifier, public, protected or private.

 

    class Bulk_quote : public Quote {
	    Bulk_quote() = default;
	    Bulk_quote(const std::string&, double, std::size_t, double);
	    double net_price(std::size_t) const override;
    private:
		std::size_t min_qty = 0;
		double discount = 0.0;
	};

 - Bulk_quote inheritsthe *isbn* function and the *bookNo* and *price* data members of its *Quote* base class.
 - It defines its own version of *net_price* and has two additional data members
 - When the derivation is *public*, the *public* members of the base class become part of the interface of the derived class as well.

### Virtual Functions in the Derived Class

Derived classes frequently, but not always, override the virtual funtions that they inherit. 

If no override, then inherits from base class.

### Derived-class Objects and the Derived-to-Base Conversion

Think the *Bulk_quote* object as an object containing parts it uniquely has and something Quote has.

We can bind a base-class reference or pointer to the base-class part of a derived object.

    Quote item;		 
    Bulk_quote bulk; 
    Quote *p = &item;	// p points to a Quote Obj
    p = &bulk;			// p points to the Quote part of bulk
    Quote &r = bulk;	// r bound to the Quote part of bulk

This conversion is often referred to as the **derived-to-base** conversions.

>The fact that a derived object contains subobjects for its base classes is key to how inheritance works

### Derived class Constructors

A derived class must use a base-class constructor to initialize its base-class part.

    Bulk_quote (const std::string& book, double p, std::size_t qty, double disc) : 
			    Quote(book, p), min_qty(qty), discount(disc) {}

As with a data member, unless we say otherwise, the base part of a derived object is default initialized.

> The base class is initialized first, and then the members of the derived class are initialized in the order in which they are declared in the class.

### Inheritance and static Members

Follows the same rule.

### Declarations of Derived/Base Classes

    class Bulk_quote;
    class Quote;
    class Derived : private Base { ... };

### Preventing Inheritance

Use *final*

### Conversions and Inheritance

We can bind a reference (or pointer) to a base-class type to a derived object. This implies that when we use a reference (or a pointer) to a base-class type, we don't know the actual type of the object to which the pointer or reference is bound. That object could be an object of the base class or it can be an object of a derived class.

### Static Type and Dynamic Type

 - [ ] Static type -- known at compile time
 - [ ] Dynamic type -- known at run time

**There is no implicit conversions from Base to Derived**

We cannot do the following:

    Quote base;
    Bulk_quote* bulkP = &base;  //ERROR
    Bulk_quote& bulkRef = base; //ERROR

Interesting to Note:

    Bulk_quote bulk;
    Quote item(bulk); // uses the Quote::Quote(const Quote&) constructor
    item = bulk; 	  // calls Quote::operator=(const Quote&)

## 15.3 Virtual Functions

Recall that dymic binding happens when a virtual member function is called through a reference or a pointer to a base-class type.

Because we don't know which version of a function is called until run time, virtual functions MUST ALWAYS BE DEFINED.

A derived-class function that overrides an inherited virtual function must have exactly the same parameter type(s) as the base.

Include *override* and *final* for debugging purposes.

### Circumventing the Virtual Mechanism

    double undiscounted = baseP->Quote::net_price(42);

## 15.4 Abstract Base Classes

### Pure virtual functions

    class Disc_quote : public Quote {
    public:
	    Disc_quote() = default;
	    Disc_quote(const std::string& book, double price, std::size_t qty, double disc):
				   Quote(book, price), quantity(qty), discount(disc) { }
    protected:
	    std::size_t quantity = 0;
	    double discount =0.0;
    };

### Class with Pure Virtuals Are Abstract Base Classes

A class containing (or inheriting without overriding) a pure virtual function is an **abstract base class**.

### A Derived Class Constructor Initializes Its Direct Base Class Only

    class Bulk_quote : public Disc_quote {
    public:
	    Bulk_quote() = default;
	    Bulk_quote(const std::string& book, double price, std::size_t qty, double disc):
				   Disc_quote(book, price, qty, disc) { }
	double net_price(std::size_t) const override;
	};

## 15.5 Access Control and Inheritance

### Protected Members

 - Like private, protected members are inaccessible to suers of the class
 - Like public, protected members are accessible to members and friends of classes derived from this class
 - A derived class member or friend may access the protected members of the base class only through a derived object. The derived class has no special access to the protected members of base-class objects.

### public, private, and protected Inheritance

    class Base{
    public:
	    void pub_mem();
	private:
		char priv_mem;
	protected:
		int prot_mem;
	};
	
	struct Pub_Derv : public Base {
		int f() {return prot_mem;} //OK
		char g() {return priv_mem;} //error
	};
	struct Priv_Derv : private Base {
		int f1() const { return prot_mem; }
	};

The derivation access specifier has no effect on whether members (and friends) of a derived class may access the memebers of its own direct base class. Access to the members of a base class is controlled by the **access specifiers in the base class itself**.

The purpose of the derivation access specifier is to **control the access that users of the derived class** -including other classes derived from the derived class- have to the members inherited from Base:

    Pub_Derv d1;
    Priv_Derv d2;
    d1.pub_mem(); //OK pUBLIC
    d2.pub_mem(); // error, pub_mem is private in the derived class

More clear Example:

    struct Derived_from_public : public Pub_Derv {
	    // OK
	    int use_base() { return prot_mem; }
	};
	struct Derived_from_private: public Priv_Derv {
		//ERROR
		int use_base() { return prot_mem; }
	};

### Accessibility of Derived-to-Base Conversions

Consider D inherits from B

 - User Code may use the derived-to-base conversion only if D inherits publicly from B. User code may not use the conversion if D inherits from B using either protected or private
 - Member functions and friends of D can use the conversion of B regardless of how D inheirts from B. The derived-to-base conversion to a direct base class is always accessible to members and friends of a derived class
 - Member functions and friends of classes derived from D may use the derived-to-base conversion if D inherits from B using either public or protected. otherwise not.

**Default Inheritance protection levels**

 - Class has a private Inheritance
 - Struct has a public Inheritance

    Class Base {....};
    struct D1 : Base {...}; 	//public by default
    class D2 : Base {,,,};		//private by default

## 15.7 Constructors and Copy Control

### Virtual Destructors

The destructor needs to be virtual to allow objects in the inheritance hierarchy to be dynamically allocated.

We have to make:

    class Quote {
    public:
	    virtual ~Quote() = default;
    };
Example:

    Quote *itemP = new Quote; //same static and dynamic type
    delete itemP; 			  // destructor for Quote called
    itemP = new Bulk_quote;   // static and dynamic types differ
    delete itemP;			  // destructor for Bulk_quote called

### Virtual Destructors Turn off Synthesized Move






